Time series decomposition is
crucial in understanding the
underlying patterns and
behaviors of time series data.
It also significantly improves
the accuracy and effectiveness
of our forecasting models by
isolating and analyzing the main
components, trend, seasonality,
and noise.
In this video, we will leverage
the power of PyCaret, and CrateDB
for time series
decomposition, unlocking
valuable insights for
forecasting and analysis.
Time series decomposition is a
technique that involves breaking
down a time series into its
three core components.
This method is essential for
understanding the different
factors that influence the
behavior of the data set over
time.
First, we have the trend
component, which shows us the
long term direction or movement
in the data, representing the
gradual increase or decrease
over time.
Then we have seasonality, which
refers to patterns that repeat
at regular intervals within the
data.
These could be influenced by
various seasonal factors such as
holidays, weather patterns, or
business cycles, and are
critical for understanding
periodic fluctuations.
Finally, residuals represent the
random variations, also known as
noise, that remain after the
trend and seasonal components
have been accounted for.
These are the unpredictable
parts of the series that often
hold unique insights into
unforeseen events or anomalies
within the data.
By separating a time series into
these components, we gain a
clearer understanding of the
underlying structure and are
better positioned to make
accurate predictions and
strategic decisions based on the
data.
This notebook demonstrates how
to use SQLAlchemy to load time
series data from CrateDB,
preprocess it and plot time
series decomposition with PyCaret,
an efficient low code
machine learning library in
Python that has been introduced
in a previous session.
All necessary dependencies to
run this notebook are located in
the requirements text file and
they can be installed by running
pip install command.
If you are running this notebook
in an environment like Google
Collab, use the absolute path as
illustrated here.
As a first step, we are looking
into connecting to a CrateDB
instance using SQLAlchemy.
Firstly, we establish a
connection string and we can
consider two scenarios, one for
connecting to a local CrateDB
instance which is often used for
development and testing
purposes, and another for
connecting to a CrateDB cloud
instance which is typically
utilized for production
databases hosted in the cloud.
Once the connection string is
defined, we create an engine
object in SQLAlchemy.
It's a common interface to the
database that we are querying
from.
The following code demonstrates
fetching data from the CrateDB
instance and loading it into a
pandas data frame.
We execute a simple SQL query to
select all records from weather
data.
After successfully fetching the
data, we preview the first 5 rows
of our data frame as illustrated
in the notebook.
The next few steps preprocess
data for an analysis by setting
the index column, interpolating
missing data, and computing
daily averages.
We refer to our previous video
on exploratory data analysis for
more details on these steps.
Similarly, we also set up the
forecasting experiment for time
series data by passing the
temperature as the target
variable and three seasonal
periods.
As the model suggests, we can
observe that there are possible
seasonality for five and 20
days.
The primary seasonality is
detected for five days.
Now let's visualize the time
series decomposition with
PyCaret.
PyCaret automates much of the
analytical process, and it
already detected the recurring
pattern in our data.
To further explore this, we can
employ the plot model function
with the plot="decomp"
parameter.
This powerful visualization
command instructs PyCaret to
generate decomposition graphs,
which will display the trend,
seasonality, and residuals of
our time series.
As illustrated in the first
graph, we can also pass specific
parameters to change the
seasonality.
For instance, we can use the
same method with a seasonal
period of 20 days.
The second graph illustrates the
result.
Besides classical additive
decomposition, we can use more
advanced decomposition methods.
The STL decomposition allows us
to estimate both the trend and
seasonal components with greater
flexibility.
One of the key advantages of STL
is its ability to let the
seasonal component evolve, which
is particularly useful for data
sets where seasonality may vary
from one cycle to another.
The third graph in the notebook
visualizes the STL
decomposition.
Based on the results, we can
make a couple of observations.
There is an upward trend of
temperature in spring and summer
and a downward trend in autumn.
Seasonality is also present in
the series.
The residuals in classical
decompositions are also
interesting, showing periods of
high variability.
Moving forward, let's take a
closer look at how PyCaret
enables us to understand the
statistical properties of our
time series data.
PyCaret's Check Stats
function is a comprehensive tool
that provides a snapshot of
statistics and performs a suite
of statistical tests on our data
or the residuals of our model.
For instance, the summary test
gives us descriptive statistics
offering insights into the
central tendency, dispersion and
shape of the data sets
distribution.
As you can see, other tests give
us deeper insights into our time
series.
With this overview of time
series decomposition with PyCaret,
and CrateDB, you should
have a solid understanding of
the data's statistical
properties, which is essential
for reliable and insightful
anomaly detection and
forecasting.